c h a p t e r   t w e n t y - e i g h t
Technology
daniel g. krutka, university of north texas
For a list of all the ways technology has failed to improve the quality of life, please press three.
alice kahn1
Of all my technologies, my smartphone probably brings with it the most blessings. 
I am ever appreciative that its map applications can guide me and my car to my 
destination with suggested routes if traffic piles up. It streams whatever music I 
choose and pulls up e-mails so I can be productive even at red lights. The apps, 
sites, and programs allow me to explore cities around the world within seconds. It 
delivers to me online gifs and memes that make me laugh, and I have even built 
meaningful professional relationships through its social media platforms. In my 
classes, the collaborative, digital, and virtual capabilities allow me and my students 
to transform our learning in innovative ways. Sometimes I sit back in admiration 
and warmly think, thank you for being there, right in my pocket, whenever I need you. 
But, as in some relationships, the burdensindividual and socialbecome 
evident with time and reflection. I rely on my smartphone and when things are not 
working, I get frustrated quickly, particularly if a room full of students are waiting 
on me to fix the problem. At times, the array of apps can be distracting when I am 
trying to listen to someone else, fall asleep for the night, or read something longer 
than a tweet. The ways in which my smartphone beeps at me can cause anxieties 
when I want calm. And, I know my smartphone sends all my data to a variety of 
companies who then sell my information off for a tidy profit. I also know that 
my smartphone was likely created at a monstrous factory in Zhengzhou, China 280  |  daniel g. krutka
by workers who make under two dollars an hour with components shipped from 
around the globe, which upon completion, were then shipped in a Boeing 747 to 
the United States (Barboza, 2016). At times, I want to technofast and turn off, find 
zen, sign out.
I guess I would describe my relationship with technology, in the lingo of Face-
book, as: its complicated. In 2018, our affairs with technologies are some combina-
tion of incredible, complicated, and troubling, but too often in the social studies, 
we approach the topic with a dispassion that accepts technologies on their terms, 
not ours. In this chapter, I am hoping to start a conversation about how social 
studies teachers might teach with and about technology so our students might make 
its uses and effects more compatible for democracy.
ch-ch-ch-ch-changes (turn and face the strange)
Just like the apps on my smartphone, the word technology requires periodic updates. 
The term is rooted in the Greek tekhnologia and Latin technologia to describe 
a systematic study of the arts or the terminology of a particular art (Williams, 
1976/1983, p. 316). This definition may seem strange when contrasted with the 
ways technology is often talked about in education today: My technology isnt 
working; Our district needs to keep up with changing technology; I learned 
about new technology at the conference. The contrast between classical and con-
temporary uses of the term suggest changes across peoples, places, and points in 
time. Raymond Williams outlined at least three historical variations of technology. 
The first variation dates to the 1st century and relates to the definition I just 
shared: techno- as a useful art (i.e., technics), systematic study of a topic, or the 
terminology of an art or craft that uses technical language. In describing craft or 
manufacturing skills, the term was often used in contrast to the fine or performing 
arts. Technology and art may seem to make strange bedfellows to us today, but the 
past is a foreign country (Lowenthal, 2015). For example, people of medieval soci-
eties did not view the world through binary or mathematical lenses that divorced 
technology and art as contrasting ways of seeing the world. Instead, 
the Earth was considered a living being, and the human artisan was an assistant or mid-
wife to nature. Metals grew in the womb of the Earth. The miner, smelter, metalworkers 
and goldsmith engaged in the sacred tasks of helping nature reach perfection. (Briggs & 
Peat, 1999, p. 148)
The objectivity of the scientific revolution and the efficiency of the industrial rev-
olutions ushered in modernist worldviews and, consequently, uses of technology of 
which are more familiar today. Prior to the 19th century the term was lightly used 
in English, but this era saw technology represented as the practical application technology  |  281
of sciences like medical technology. Just as the printing press divorced words from 
their speaker, technology shifted from skilled method or jargon toward invented 
objects that exist separate from ourselves. Finally, the 20th century saw the rise of 
technocracy where government is run not by elected officials but specialized experts 
solving disjointed technical problems (see Postman, 1992 for more). Educators are 
intimately familiar with top-down directives of technocratic experts (rarely edu-
cators themselves) who aim to settle the social studies certification requirements, 
state standards and tests, and curricular frameworks and structures.
deep in the teks of texas
As these shifting and intertwined definitions suggest, the history of this keyword 
is about much more than the newest gadgets and gizmos. While students in some 
social studies classes may learn the techniques of historians or research techniques, 
they primarily learn technologies as objects from the past (e.g., cotton gin, tele-
graph) and present (e.g., tablets, interactive whiteboards). Take the official high 
school standards known as the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills for Social 
Studies, (un)affectionately TEKS, that make mention of the prefix techno- in some 
form sixty-seven times (Texas Education Agency, 2010). Of these sixty-seven uses 
of techno-, I coded2 forty-eight as pertaining to technologies (definition 2), three as 
techniques (definition 1), and none that touched upon technocracy (definition 3). 
Taken together, the TEKS tell a story not only of technologies as inventions and 
objects, but they convey a narrative of technological progress. 
These standards primarily present technologies as positive by directly pair-
ing technology with innovation (14 times3) or discussing technologies in terms of 
advancements, developments, or improvements to standard of living or quality of 
life. In 19 instances, references resided in what I considered neutral sentences that 
asked for descriptions, impacts, or effects of technology, or mentioned the term as 
part of a laundry list of considerations. There is not a single reference in the high 
school standards that specifically encourage students to critically consider nega-
tive effects and uses of technologies in the past or present. The TEKS for sociol-
ogy and financial literacy do not even make reference to the term. The former is 
probably the discipline most inclined to ask critical questions about the effects of 
technologies on society and the latter is a field with digital banking, hacking, and 
currency. Students who study technologies as the TEKS present them will have 
little preparation in asking important questions about technologies in the present.
The narrative of technological progress presented in the TEKS is a familiar one 
that I have seen in my years as a social studies classroom teacher and teacher edu-
cator. While some teachers and students may abstain from using specific emerging 
technologies, they usually give in if others use them, a department adopts them, 